Update documentation vignette for dataset downloads (#54)
AlexsLemonade/ScPCAr: vignettes/uncompiled/_pre_ScPCAr.Rmd

  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}
---

```{r}
#| label: knitr-setup
#| include: FALSE
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  fig.width = 6,
  fig.height = 4,
  dpi = 300,
  fig.path = "scpcar-"
)
```

# Introduction

The ScPCAr package provides an interface to interact with the Single-cell Pediatric Cancer Atlas (ScPCA) Portal API.
This vignette demonstrates the basic workflow for discovering, downloading, and working with ScPCA data.

This vignette covers the following tasks for interacting with the ScPCA Portal:

1. Listing available projects
2. Selecting a project and exploring its samples
3. Obtaining an authentication token
4. Downloading all data for an ScPCA project
5. Creating a custom dataset with specified samples and data types
6. Loading ScPCA data into R

# Installing the ScPCAr Package

The ScPCAr package is currently available via GitHub.
You can install the latest version using the `pak` package:

```{r}
#| label: install-ScPCAr
#| eval: FALSE
# Install pak if needed
if (!requireNamespace("pak", quietly = TRUE)) {
  install.packages("pak")
}

# Install ScPCAr from GitHub

> pak::pak("Alexslemonade/ScPCAr")

Reviewer: I find the lowercase odd, and looks too much like a 1 or I.
```suggestion
pak::pak("AlexsLemonade/ScPCAr")
```

library(ScPCAr)
library(SingleCellExperiment)
```

# Exploring available projects

## Listing all projects

First, let's see what projects are available in the ScPCA Portal:

```{r}
#| label: list-projects
# Get a data frame of all projects
projects <- ScPCAr::scpca_projects()

# print out a portion of the data frame
head(projects)
```

The `scpca_projects()` function returns a data frame with basic project metadata.
By default, it returns a simplified version with list columns removed for easier viewing.
You can see the full structure with additional data such as a list of diagnoses, data types, external accession numbers, etc., by setting `simplify = FALSE`:

```{r}
#| label: list-projects-full
# Get the full project information including list columns
projects_full <- ScPCAr::scpca_projects(simplify = FALSE)

# View the structure of the full data frame
dplyr::glimpse(projects_full)
```

## Getting detailed project information

Now let's get more detailed information about the samples in a selected project.
We will use the first project, `SCPCP000001`, as an example.
According to the project info above, these samples are from a study of pediatric high-grade gliomas.

> We can get more detailed information about this project using its `project_id`, and here we will set `simplifyVector = TRUE` to convert simple lists into vectors where possible.

Reviewer: It's not actually used below

You can explore the full structure of this list with `str()` or `dplyr::glimpse()`, but for now we will just look at a few of the components that might be of interest.

For example, we can look at the set of diagnoses that are present, and their counts:

```{r}
#| label: project-diagnoses
data.frame(count = unlist(project_info$diagnoses_counts)) |>
  tibble::rownames_to_column("diagnosis")
```

Similarly, we can look at the data modalities available for this project, which here includes both single-cell and bulk RNA-seq data:

```{r}
#| label: project-modalities
project_info$modalities
```

# Exploring sample information

## Getting sample metadata

Let's look at the samples within our selected project:

```{r}
#| label: project-samples
# Get sample information for the project
sample_info <- ScPCAr::get_project_samples(project_id)
head(sample_info)
```

## Getting detailed sample information

We can also get detailed information for a specific sample:

```{r}
#| label: sample-detail
sample_id <- "SCPCS000001"
# Get detailed sample metadata
sample_detail <- ScPCAr::get_sample_info(sample_id)

> str(sample_detail, max.level = 1)

Reviewer: I very much see why we have `str()` and not `dplyr::glimpse()` here. oof.

Author: `glimpse()` calls `str()` for lists anyway.

```{r}
#| label: get-auth
#| eval: FALSE
# Get an authentication token
# Replace with your actual email address
my_email <- "your.email@example.com"
auth_token <- ScPCAr::get_auth(email = my_email, agree = TRUE)
```

In addition to saving your authorization token to `auth_token` (or whatever variable name you set), the `ScPCAr::get_auth()` function will store the token in the environment variable `SCPCA_AUTH_TOKEN` so it can be accessed by other `ScPCAr` functions automatically.
If you have a saved token from a previous session, you can populate the environment with a command like: `Sys.setenv("SCPCA_AUTH_TOKEN" = auth_token)` or by setting the environment variable in your shell before launching `R`.

**Important Notes:**

- You must set `agree = TRUE` to indicate you accept the terms of service
- Replace `"your.email@example.com"` with your actual email address
- Keep your token secure and don't share it publicly
- If you create a custom dataset using `ScPCAr::create_dataset()`, you will need to use the same token to access that dataset later, so be sure to save it somewhere safe (e.g., a password manager).

>   - In a later session, you can use `Sys.setenv(SCPCA_AUTH_TOKEN = saved_token)` to set the environment variable with your saved token.

Reviewer: Mostly I wanted to suggest moving the context about for use in a later _session_ to the first time "later" is used, so as not to imply later on in the same R session which did cross my mind when reading this. Take other wording as you wish.

```suggestion
- If you create a custom dataset using `ScPCAr::create_dataset()`, you will need to use the same token to access that dataset in future R sessions, so be sure to save it somewhere safe (e.g., a password manager).
  - To use your saved token the token in the future, use `Sys.setenv(SCPCA_AUTH_TOKEN = saved_token)`.
```

# Downloading data for an ScPCA project

There are two main ways for downloading data from the ScPCA Portal using `ScPCAr`: 

- Project downloads contain all available samples for a given project

> - Custom datasets allow you to specify specific subsets of samples, including samples from separate projects

Reviewer: The grammar here is a little odd. "Project downloads" and "custom datasets" feel more like _types_ data downloads, not _ways_ where I would expect a verb. Suggesting a rewording...some of which may be a little lofty 🙃 

```suggestion
There are two main ways to download data from the ScPCA Portal using `ScPCAr`: 

- Download whole projects, each with all of its available samples
- Download custom datasets, where you can request specific projects and/or samples à la carte
```

> - Custom datasets allow you to specify specific subsets of samples, including samples from separate projects

Author: How about this?
```suggestion
There are two main patterns for downloading data from the ScPCA Portal using `ScPCAr`: downloading pre-defined projects or constructing custom data sets.

- Project downloads contain all available samples for a given project
- Creating a custom dataset allows you to specify specific sets of samples, including samples from different projects
```

We will start with project downloads first, as they are a bit simpler, though less flexible. 

> ## Downloading a project SingleCellExperiment objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Downloading projects SingleCellExperiment format
```

Reviewer: I updated the header here to match AnnData, but we should also be explicit in these docs that you can only download one project at a time.

Along those lines, it would be good to have an error "can only do one at a time" in `download_project()`. Right now it's this:
```
> download_project(project_id = c("SCPCP000001", "SCPCP000020"))
Error: Project `SCPCP000001` not found.Project `SCPCP000020` not found.
```

Author: ```suggestion
## Downloading a project as SingleCellExperiment objects
```

I'll update the other heading. I prefer this phrasing

We will use the `download_project()` function, specifying the project ID, desired destination directory, and the file format.

> We also have the option to download a merged object with all samples contained in a single object.

Reviewer: I realize this phrasing is dicey because samples/libraries, but I want to convey somewhere that the merged object is _instead of_ non-merged. Feel free to choose a different way to that.

```suggestion
We also have the option to download a merged object with all samples contained in a single object instead of as individual objects.
```

> The function will download and unpack the files associated with that sample, and return a list of file paths for the downloaded files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function will download and unpack the files associated with that sample, and return a list of file paths for the downloaded files.
```

```{r}
#| label: download-project-sce
#| message: FALSE
# Download SingleCellExperiment data for our project
# This will create a directory structure under "scpca_data/"
file_paths <- ScPCAr::download_project(
  project_id,
  destination = "scpca_data",
  format = "sce"
)

# List some of the files that were downloaded
head(file_paths)
```

### Project download file structure

A standard download of SingleCellExperiment data for a project will create a directory structure like this:

```
scpca_data
└── {project_id}_single-cell-experiment_{YYYY-MM-DD}
    ├── README.md
    ├── {project_id}_bulk
    │   ├── {project_id}_bulk_metadata.tsv
    │   └── {project_id}_bulk_quant.tsv
    └── {project_id}_single-cell
        ├── {sample1_id}
        │   ├── {library1_id}_celltype-report.html
        │   ├── {library1_id}_filtered.rds
        │   ├── {library1_id}_processed.rds
        │   ├── {library1_id}_qc.html
        │   └── {library1_id}_unfiltered.rds
        ├── {sample2_id}
        ...
        
```

Note that the `library_id` and `sample_id` often have different numbers, as a single sample may have been sequenced across multiple libraries.

> For details about the contents of these files, see the [ScPCA Portal documentation](https://scpca.readthedocs.io/en/latest/download_files.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For details about the contents of these files, see the [ScPCA Portal documentation](https://scpca.readthedocs.io/en/stable/download_files.html#project-downloads).
```

> 

Reviewer: Let's also link here for merged structure: https://scpca.readthedocs.io/en/latest/download_files.html#merged-object-downloads

Author: I think the one link is sufficient, as the merged objects are near enough on the page that people should be able to find them.

## Downloading projects in AnnData/H5AD format

`ScPCAr` also supports downloading data in AnnData (H5AD) format, which is commonly used in Python-based single-cell analysis workflows:

```{r}
#| label: h5ad-download
#| eval: FALSE
# Download the same project in H5AD format
file_paths_h5ad <- ScPCAr::download_project(
  project_id,
  destination = "scpca_data",
  format = "anndata"
)
```

> For more about the expected files when downloading samples in this format, see the [ScPCA Portal AnnData docs](https://scpca.readthedocs.io/en/stable/download_files.html#anndata-downloads).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more about the expected files when downloading samples in this format, see the [ScPCA Portal AnnData docs](https://scpca.readthedocs.io/en/stable/download_files.html#download-folder-structure-for-anndata-project-downloads).
```

# Custom ScPCA datasets

The ScPCAr package supports the creation of custom datasets that allow you to choose specific samples for download, including samples from multiple projects.

> After exploring the metadata with functions like `get_project_info()`, `get_project_samples()` and `get_sample_info()`, you may have a list of samples that you would like to download. 

Reviewer: We should also mention that projects can be included in dataset downloads. I wondered if you omitted this intentionally to get people using the `download_project()` as the main way to get whole projects? If so (or anyways!), I might come out and say that - projects can also be included in custom datasets, but you'll have a better time getting projects with `download_project()`. 

With this caveat/intro, I think it's good to keep examples to samples.

Author: I view the use of projects in that function as a shortcut for adding a set of samples, so I don't think it merits a separate mention in the introduction here.

Author: I realized that I do mention projects when I talk about each of the specific functions for creating projects, and I think that is sufficient.

## Creating a custom dataset

To create a custom dataset, use the `create_dataset()` function.

> This will return a dataset ID that you will want to keep track of for later access to the dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will return a dataset ID that you will want to keep track of for access to the dataset in a later session.
```

Author: Or the same session.

Reviewer: I think I got mixed up with the token here. fine as is.

> Note that the dataset is also tied to the authentication token, so you will need to use the same token to access the dataset later. **Make sure you have the token saved somewhere safe!**

Reviewer: I'd reiterate how to do this by grabbing `Sys.getenv("SCPCA_AUTH_TOKEN")`

> Note that the dataset is also tied to the authentication token, so you will need to use the same token to access the dataset later. **Make sure you have the token saved somewhere safe!**

Author: ```suggestion
Note that the dataset is also tied to the authentication token, so you will need to use the same token to access the dataset later. 
**Make sure you have the token saved somewhere safe!** 
See [Authentication](#authentication) for details.
```

`create_dataset()` takes a vector of samples and/or a vector of projects, and will return a dataset ID that you can use later to add or removed samples and projects, as well as to initiate dataset processing and download. 
Here we will make a small example dataset with two B-ALL samples from two different projects, `SCPCS000212` and `SCPCS000652`, which are from projects [SCPCP000008](https://scpca.alexslemonade.org/projects/SCPCP000008) and [SCPCS000022](https://scpca.alexslemonade.org/projects/SCPCP000022), respectively.

```{r}
#| label: create-dataset
my_dataset <- create_dataset(samples = c("SCPCS000212", "SCPCS000652"))
```

> By default a new project will use SCE objects, but you can also specify `format = "anndata"` to create a dataset with AnnData objects instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, single-cell data will be formatted as SingleCellExperiment objects, but you can also specify `format = "anndata"` to create a dataset with AnnData objects instead.
```

> *Once a dataset is created, you can not change the format, and must start fresh with a new dataset.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Once a dataset is created, you can not change the format.
You must use `create_dataset()` to create a new dataset with a different format.*
```

Other options include whether or not to include bulk RNA-seq data; the default is no bulk data, but you can include bulk data with `include_bulk = "TRUE"`.

> Note that the bulk data will be included for each entire project, not just the specified samples.

Reviewer: I think this sounds weird but can't find another way to say it

```suggestion
Note that the bulk data will be included for each sample's entire project, not just the specified samples.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Note that the bulk data will be included for all available samples in each project that the selected samples come from, not just the specified samples.
```

You can also specify an email address that will be used for notification when the dataset has completed processed.
For more details on processing, [see below](#processing-and-downloading-a-custom dataset). 

### Modifying a custom dataset

To add samples or projects to a custom dataset, use the `add_dataset_samples()` function; to remove samples or projects, use the `remove_dataset_samples()` function.

> You can also fully replace the contents of dataset with a new set of samples and/or projects using the `replace_dataset_data()` function.

Reviewer: Aha! Projects!

Ok, so maybe you didn't omit projects to be sneaky 😄

Author: Hmm, now I have to think about my earlier reply.

> (This may be convenient as it will not generate a new dataset ID, while rerunning `create_dataset()` would.)

Reviewer: It seems to me that this is more than just a parenthetical, based on discussions we've had about it? Could this be..

```suggestion
We recommend this approach rather than creating a new dataset, since you will preserve your existing dataset ID rather than creating a new one.
```

Author: I do think it is more of a parenthetical. For my pov, the discussions were more about whether or not to include the function at all. I don't necessarily think we need to worry too much about recommending it.

# View a summary of the object
sce
```

### Working with the SingleCellExperiment object

Once loaded, you can work with the SingleCellExperiment object using standard Bioconductor tools.
For more information on the contents of the SingleCellExperiment objects provided by ScPCA, see the [ScPCA Portal documentation](https://scpca.readthedocs.io/en/latest/sce_file_contents.html#components-of-a-singlecellexperiment-object).

```{r}
#| label: work-with-sce
# Access library metadata
library_metadata <- metadata(sce)
library_metadata$sample_id

# Access count data
counts <- counts(sce)
dim(counts)

# Access cell metadata
cell_metadata <- colData(sce)
cell_metadata

# Access gene metadata
gene_metadata <- rowData(sce)
gene_metadata
```

And of course we can make some standard plots.
Here a UMAP colored by the consensus cell type annotation.
(This one has a few too many cell types to be easily distinguishable, but we'll do it anyway for demonstration purposes only!)

```{r}
#| label: fig-umap
#| fig.width: 10
#| fig.height: 6
#| fig.cap: "UMAP of Library SCPCL000286 colored by consensus cell type annotation."
# View the UMAP, colored by consensus cell type

> scater::plotUMAP(sce, color_by = "consensus_celltype_annotation") +

Reviewer: Can we do a smaller `point_size` here?

Author: I really wanted to keep this minimal, so I'd rather just leave the default.

>   ggplot2::coord_fixed() +

Reviewer: This isn't coming through maybe because of the gargantuan legend? Y-axis is longer than x-axis

Author: I investigated, and it is doing what it is meant to: the scales of the two axes are equal, they just have different limits due to how the points ended up distributed. Leaving as is.

If you have a saved token from a previous session, you can populate the environment with a command like: `Sys.setenv("SCPCA_AUTH_TOKEN" = auth_token)` or by setting the environment variable in your shell before launching `R`.

**Important Notes:**

- You must set `agree = TRUE` to indicate you accept the terms of service
- Replace `"your.email@example.com"` with your actual email address
- Keep your token secure and don't share it publicly
- If you create a custom dataset using `ScPCAr::create_dataset()`, you will need to use the same token to access that dataset in future R sessions, so be sure to save it somewhere safe (e.g., a password manager).
  - To use your saved token the token in the future, use `Sys.setenv(SCPCA_AUTH_TOKEN = saved_token)`.

# Downloading data for an ScPCA project

There are two main patterns for downloading data from the ScPCA Portal using `ScPCAr`: downloading pre-defined projects or constructing custom data sets.

- Project downloads contain all available samples for a given project

> - Creating a custom dataset allows you to specify specific sets of samples, including samples from different projects

Reviewer: little more parallel
```suggestion
- Custom datasets allow you to specify specific sets of samples, including samples from different projects
```
